<pre>
  DEF: 1
  Title: Scoring Methods for the Canonical Debate
  Author: @CanonicalDebateLab.
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Status: Active
  Type: Paper
  Created: 2018-06-17
  License: MIT
  Replaces: 0
</pre>

=Scoring Methods.=

It's very important to collect all the Arguments and information available related to a debate, and make them available to everyone interested. However, some Arguments are better than others, and keeping with the principle of reducing friction, there should be a way of separating the chaff from the wheat. In fact, many of our Principles can be supported through a process of numerically evaluating and weighing the different Arguments. To this end, Gruff supports several different formulas for rating, or "Scoring" Claims and Arguments.

==1 Purpose.==

Scoring serves the following purposes:

* Sort Arguments in terms of their effectiveness
* Reveal popular opinions on debates
* Allow users to view debates through the lens of their own beliefs
* Allow users to view the same debates through the lens of other users (anonymously)
* Reveal how the validity (or lack thereof) of underlying Claims can strengthen or weaken Arguments
* Reveal inconsistencies in the beliefs of a user
* Reveal hidden biases

''Important!''
Scoring should not be about who "wins". The goal is not to put your side on top! (although that seems like the obvious point). The point is to get a clearer view of your own personal viewpoint on the debate. When this is what is given the focus, the value of the debate becomes clearer. 

==2 Criteria.==

Before designing a scoring method, it's important to reflect on what are characteristics we want in a scoring algorithm. Certainly, the method should help us achieve each of the goals listed in the section above. No one algorithm (at least so far) is perfectly suited to every objective, and so Gruff supports several different approaches, as described below. Multiple equations were tried and discarded, and others were maintained.

The following guidelines were used in the selection process. None of the methods satisfies all of them in every case.

'''''The result of just one Argument shouldn’t be better than the Strength of that argument'''''

It would be misleading, for example, to award a score of 100% to a Claim that is supported by only one Argument with a Strength Score of 30% (because it's either possibly untrue, or largely irrelevant).

'''''Adding another Argument on a side should increase the weight on that side'''''

If a Claim is supported by an Argument with nearly 100% Strength, and a second, weaker Argument is provided to prop up the first, it wouldn't make sense to take an average (for example), which would reduce the overall support of the Claim. 

As a corollary to this, increasing the score of one of the Arguments should always increase the weight on that side, or at least not be harmful to its case.

'''''A single Argument with a Strength of 100% and no opposition should have a result of 100%''''

And, correspondingly, a 100% effective counter-argument should result in a score of 0%, assuming there are no supporting Arguments. A good example of this is a piece of irrefutable evidence: just one good piece of evidence should be enough to prove a Claim.

'''''Adding an Argument with a Score of 0% should not affect the result'''''

An Argument with a Score of 0% is either completely false, totally irrelevant, or both. It would definitely be a problem if participants could alter the outcome of a debate by spamming the discussion with ineffective Arguments.

'''''Re-grouping shouldn’t change the outcome significantly'''''

This is the hardest criteria to support mathematically. Intuitively, assuming that all Arguments have been sufficiently vetted, rebutted and voted, performing a Group Arguments curation to place several weaker Arguments beneath a more general heading should not weaken or exaggerate the outcome for that side. Three partially-relevant Arguments (30% each, let's say), should be just as effective separately as one more relevant (e.g. 65%) Argument that has them as supporting Arguments.

'''''The outcome should match human intuition'''''

This is the necessary catch-all for any criteria we may have missed. If the outcome of a calculation doesn't match what people would expect (and this is hard to define, since each person has a slightly different intuition), then we must pause and consider what we were expecting and why. Then, adjust the algorithm accordingly.

Some of the more difficult questions to consider here are:

* If both sides have 100% convincing (Strong) Arguments, but one side has extra supporting Arguments, should we declare that side to be more convincing? (What does 100% mean in this case?)
* Is one 80% Strength Argument more effective, the same, or less than two 40% Strength Arguments?
* If not, how many 40% Arguments would it take to defeat an 80% Argument

==3 Scoring Methods.==

===3.1 Claim vs. Argument.===

The Score of a Claim is a representation of its truthfulness, the confidence that people can have that the statement represents a true statement. Since this is synonymous with a debate, arriving at a Truth Score for the Claim can be considered the objective of that debate. However, as will be shown below, the Truth Score of a Claim is an important factor in the scores of Arguments upon which they are based. In other words, the Truth Score reflects on any debate in which a Claim is used.

Debates over an Argument affect its Relevance Score. These debates take the form of other Arguments in support of or attacking the relevance or significance of the Argument in the context of this debate (arguments against the accuracy of the argument are actually Arguments applied to the base Claim, rather than the Argument itself).

Depending on the Scoring Method, as described below, the way a Relevance Score is calculated may or may not be mathematically equivalent to the way a Truth Score is derived.

===3.2 Popular Vote.===

The Popular Vote is a very straightforward mechanism for scoring. On any Claim or Argument, Debaters can register their opinion on the Score of an element. The Popular Vote, then, is simply the average of all votes.

Popular voting can be considered a "dangerous" form of viewing the results of a debate. There are several reasons for this:

'''''It can be subject to attack by dishonest voters, especially those with many fake accounts'''''

This is a very genuine concern. It is critical that debates not be influenced or dominated by bad actors with fake accounts. As stated in the Principles, the system must guarantee to the best of our ability that there is only one account per person. 

'''''Just showing the Popular Vote can distort the outcome, due to popularity bias'''''

There will certainly be some distortion due to this effect - there is no escaping the way our brain works, not completely. However, the main purpose here is not to see which side wins, but rather to provide the tools to help people understand themselves, which is the first tool in the fight against cognitive bias. 

'''''There is no guarantee the popular outcome is the right outcome'''''

This is true, but the Popular Score here is not meant to be used as THE measure used for a vote. Rather, it is meant to help each potential voter figure out where they stand on the issue when the time comes to vote. The "tyranny of the majority" is a problem for a democracy, and therefore outside the scope of this system. For more information on how this can be resolved, see the [https://github.com/DemocracyEarth/paper Democracy Earth white paper]. With the creation of this system, we certainly hope that the majority will be much more understanding and accommodating, rather than tyrannical.

===3.3 Personal Vote.===

The Personal Vote is the simplest scoring mechanism of all. It is simply a view of a Claim or Argument which shows the score the user chose, rather than the Popular Vote. Note, however, that on Claims or Arguments on which a user has not yet voted, the Score shown would instead be the Popular Vote (shown in such a way as to signal to the user that they have yet to register their Score).

===3.4 Roll-up Score.===

When one looks at the Popular or Personal Vote of a Claim or an Argument, they are looking at the final overall opinion attributed to that topic. Oddly, that Score is in no way influenced by the Arguments given for or against the topic, except as they indirectly influence the opinions of the people that cast a vote.

It would be very interesting to see how those votes compare to the sum total of the Arguments that were given on each side of that debate. Consider a very simple case:

* Claim A, with a Popular Vote of 65%
* Argument A, with a Popular Vote of 70%
* Argument B, with a Popular Vote of 70%

If we are to look at only the Popular Vote of Claim A, we will see that it is "winning", at least in the sense that it has been given more than a 50/50 confidence rating. However, if you look at the Arguments on either side, they seem to balance each other out. Knowing that there is a significant difference between the two can help highlight some disconnect in popular (or personal) thinking, which may have resulted from:

* An incomplete debate, with key Arguments missing
* Some source of bias in the voting, which is causing people to internally disregard key Arguments or weigh them differently
* Simple laziness - perhaps many users preferred to vote only on the top Claim without giving the Arguments enough consideration to vote

Hopefully, by illustrating the difference between these Scores, the system can help counteract the causes of this type of disconnect. 

Since the Scores of each of the Arguments, one for and one against, are identical, it is natural to assume that they cancel each other out. It would seem, then, that the correct Score for Claim A from this perspective would be 50%, rather than 65%. Since the 50% is calculated from the bottom (the Arguments) up, we call this the Roll-up Score.

===3.4.1 Strength Score.===

Now, consider the following situation: Argument A has a Relevance Score of 70%, and Argument B has a Relevance Score of -70%; however, the Claim underlying Argument A (let's call this Claim AC) has a Truth Score of only 50%, while the Claim underlying Argument B (Claim BC) has a Truth Score of 100% (everyone magically seems to agree with it). How should that impact Claim A? Should an Argument that stands on shakier grounds be considered just as strong as one that doesn't?

For this, we can borrow a basic principle from software engineering: if you have one system that is down 90% of the time, and it depends on another that is also offline 90% of the time, how reliable is it? The answer to this problem is to [http://www.weibull.com/hotwire/issue181/article181.htm multiply the two reliabilities] to get the reliability of the system as a whole: 

0.9 x 0.9 = 0.81, or 81%

This makes a lot of intuitive sense for a Strength Score, as well. If an Argument has a Relevance of 100% (absolutely definitive, if true) and its Claim has a Truth of 100% (absolutely true), then the Strength should be 100% (you can't possibly do better than that). If both are 0% (totally irrelevant, and false), then Strength would have to be 0%. But also, something that is 100% convincing, but based on a total lie should be 0% effective, as with an absolute truth that is completely off the subject. And, what about something that is absolutely convincing if true, but we're only 50% sure it's true? A Strength of 50% seems perfectly reasonable.

Therefore, the Strength Score S of an Argument A, with a Relevance Score of RA, which is based on a Claim C, with a Truth Score of TC, is:

S = RA * TC

===3.4.2 Roll-up from Strength Scores.===

Given the example above, of an Argument A with a Relevance Score of 70%, and a Claim of Truth 50%, we can now calculate that its Strength Score is:

0.7 * 0.5 = 0.35, or 35%

Meanwhile, the Strength Score of Argument B is:

0.7 * 1.0 = 0.7, or 70%

How should we calculate the Truth Score of Claim A now? We know that when Arguments are completely balanced, it makes sense to give it an even score of 50%. Also, it makes no sense to go below 0%, nor above 100%, and no matter how many Arguments are for or against the Claim, one Argument on the opposite side should move the needle to place at least some doubt on the Truth of the Claim.

Average of Scores

The simplest way to calculate the Roll-up Score would be to take an average of the Strength Scores of the Arguments, and use that to find where the Truth lies on the range of possible scores (we will use the notation SSpro for Strength Scores in favor of a Claim or Argument, and SScon for those against, and npro and ncon for the number of Arguments in favor and against, respectively):

TS = 0.5 + 0.5 * (∑SSpro - ∑SScon) / (npro + ncon)

In the case of our simple example, the Truth Score TA of Claim A would be:

TA = 0.5 + 0.5 * (0.35 - 0.70)/2 = 0.5 + 0.5 * -0.175 = 0.5 - 0.088 = 0.413, or 41.3%

This approach has the advantage of ease of comprehension and implementation. It also works fairly well against our criteria in the case of having Arguments on both sides of the debate. However, it fails to satisfy one of the main criteria: Adding another argument on a side should increase the weight on that side. 

Consider the case of a Claim with only a single, strong Argument to support it, with, say, a Strength of 80%. On its own, the final score would be 90%. However, if an Argument with a Score of 40% were added in support, the Truth Score would actually decrease to 80%.

The naive version of this approach also fails another test: Adding an Argument with a Score of 0% should not affect the result. If a participant counters the aforementioned 80% Argument with a complete lie, the Truth Score would nevertheless become:

TA = 0.5 + 0.5 * (0.8 - 0.0)/2 = 0.5 + 0.5 * 0.4 = 0.5 + 0.2 = 0.7, only 70%

Divide by Total

A slight change in the previous formula offers a solution to the problem of averages. If we perform a weighted average by dividing by the sum of the magnitude of all scores, we get:

TS = 0.5 + 0.5 *  (∑SSpro - ∑SScon) / (∑SSpro + ∑SScon)

This immediately solves the problem of weakening your side just by adding a poor Argument. If all the Arguments are on one side, then no matter how many there are, the final score will be either 100% or 0%, depending on which side they reside. Any new Arguments will always (except in the case of a 0% Argument) add Strength to to side it supports, while lowering the average Effectiveness for the other side. Also, any 0% Arguments are completely ignored, since  a Score of 0 affects neither the divisor nor the dividend.

Now let's look how it performs in more robust situations. In the case of our simple example, the Truth Score TA of Claim A would be:

TA = 0.5 + 0.5 * (0.35 - 0.70)/(0.35 + 0.70) = 0.5 + 0.5 * -0.33 = 0.5 - 0.167 = 0.333, or 33.3%

This seems like a fairly reasonable approach, at least in the case of a stable debate, with no duplicate Arguments. However, the previous sentence already indicates one form of dishonest attack that could be used to change the scores in a debate: it would be possible to spam the Claim with duplicate or similar Arguments. If you have one Argument A in favort with 100% Strength, and then another Argument B against with 100% Strength, the Roll-up Score is a 50/50 outcome. If someone were to create just one copy of Argument A, it would change the Roll-up to 66.7%, with no material change in the debate, from the perspective of reasoning.

Furthermore, the very useful and common act of curation known as Group Arguments (see Curation, below) can have a serious negative impact on the score for the side that is receiving the reorganization. Consider the following case: A Claim with Arguments A1, A2 and A3 for the Claim, and Arguments B1 through B10 against the Claim, with the following Strength Scores:
A1: 70%
A2: 50%
A3: 30%
B1: 80%
B2: 60%
B3 through B10: 30% each

This yields a Roll-up Score of:

TS = 0.5 + 0.5 * -2.3 / 5.3 = 0.5 - 0.217 = 0.283, or 28.3%

Now, suppose the Arguments B3 through B10 are distinct, but fall under one generally related category that's better expressed as a single Argument. Even in the strongest case, a new Argument with 100% Strength, the result would change:

TS = 0.5 + 0.5 * -0.9 / 3.9 = 0.5 - 0.115 = 0.385, or 38.5%

The simple, and necessary, act of reorganization significantly weakened the case against the Claim. 

Aggregate Strength Score

In order to reduce this effect, and the effect of Argument spamming, Gruff therefore takes a slightly different approach to calculating the Roll-up Score, known as the Aggregate Strength Score:

Find the Aggregate Strength of the Arguments for a Claim
Find the Aggregate Strength of the Arguments against a Claim
Calculate the total Roll-up Score as an average of the Aggregate Scores, as above

We define the Aggregate Strength Score AS via the following algorithm:

Sort the Arguments on the appropriate side (for or against) by the value of their Strength Scores SS
Set the current AS to the absolute value of the SS of the top Score
For each remaining Argument, in order of the sorted list, set the AS to be the current AS, plus the SS of the current Argument times the amount that remains towards reaching 100%

AS = AS + SS * (1.0 - AS)

Thus, for three Arguments A1, A2 and A3 with SS of 30%, 70% and 50%, respectively, we get an AES of:

AS = 0.7 + 0.5 * (1.0 - 0.7) + 0.3 * (1.0 - (0.7 + 0.5 * (1.0 - 0.7))) 
= 0.7 + 0.15 + 0.045 = 0.895, or 89.5%

The equation for the Roll-up Score then becomes:

TS = 0.5 + 0.5 * (ASpro - AScon)

Going back to our previous example of the Group Arguments action, we see that before the reorganization, the Truth Score would be:

ASpro = 89.5%
AScon = 99.54%
TS = 44.98%

After the reorganization, there is a change, but it's a lot less pronounced (assuming, again, that the newly grouped Argument has a Strength Score of 100%):

AES for = 89.5%
AES against = 100.00%
TS = 44.75%

Again, we see issues with this approach. The more arguments there are, the closer the final score tends towards 50%, which isn't very informative, and may go against human intuition. This solution also violates the principle that Adding another Argument on a side should increase the weight on that side.

Consider the simple case of two 100% strong Arguments, one in support and another against the Claim:

ASpro = 100%
AScon = 100%
TS = 50%

Now imagine that a second Argument is added against the Claim, again with a 100% Strength. In this case, the score remains unchanged:

ASpro = 100%
AScon = 100%
TS = 50%


Paired Ranking

This final approach builds on the concept of the Aggregate Strength Score, but adds one more intuition:

Two arguments of equal Strength, one for and one against, should cancel each other out

Since it would be rare to see two Arguments with exactly the same Strength Score, the solution has to be a bit more flexible. We solve this problem in the following manner:

Sort all Arguments on each side by their Strength Scores, from strongest to least
Pair up the Arguments on each side according to their order
Count the Score of the lesser of each paired Argument as 0, and the Score of the greater Argument as its Score minus the Score of the lesser
Calculate the Score using the AS method as above, using the new Scores

Consider a debate with Arguments A1 70%, A2 50% and A3 30% vs. B1 100%, B2 80% and B3 60%:

Score for
Paired Score for
Score against
Paired Score against
70%
0%
100%
30%
50%
0%
80%
30%
30%
0%
60%
30%

This gives us:

ASpro = 0%
AScon = 65.7%
TS = 17.2%

If we add 3 more Arguments A4 30%, A5 30% and A6 20%, the Score becomes as follows:


Score for
Paired Score for
Score against
Paired Score against
70%
0%
100%
30%
50%
0%
80%
30%
30%
0%
60%
30%
30%
30%




30%
30%




20%
20%





ASpro = 60.8%
AScon = 65.7%
TS = 47.55%

And if the top Argument in favor becomes 90%:


Score for
Paired Score for
Score against
Paired Score against
90%
0%
100%
10%
50%
0%
80%
30%
30%
0%
60%
30%
30%
30%




30%
30%




20%
20%





ASpro = 60.8%
AScon = 55.9%
TS = 52.45%

Finally, if we look at the debate that started us down this path, we get:

Score for
Paired Score for
Score against
Paired Score against
100%
0%
100%
0%




100%
100%

ASpro = 0%
AScon = 100%
TS = 0%

That seems a little counterintuitive (the 100% Strength Argument in favor seems like it should have some impact), but it is still better than the result given by pure AS.

===3.5 Roll-up Levels.===

The previous examples only considered the Roll-up Scores based on the Arguments immediately for a single Claim. It is important to note, however, that the Arguments may have Arguments of their own, as may their base Claims. What if we want to see the impact of those sub-Arguments on the debate?

You could say that we want to look down another "level", and so this is the official term for the "depth" of a Roll-up calculation: Level. In the previous section, the calculations referred to Roll-up Level 1. In order to see how the Arguments on the Arguments stack up, we can look at the Roll-up level 2 Score.

Remember that the formula for a Level 1 Roll-up on the Truth Score of a Claim (we'll use Aggregate Strength Score for simplicity) is:

TS = 0.5 + 0.5 * (ASpro - AScon)

We can generalize this to say that the Level 1 Roll-up Score on any one element is:

RuS1 = 0.5 + 0.5 * (ASpro - AScon)

This equation applies equally to the Truth Score of a Claim as it does to the Relevance Score of any Argument.

Taking a simplified version of our Claim A, with pro Argument A1 and con Argument B1, if we know their Strength Scores, we can calculate the Level 1 Roll-up of Claim A. In this case, for a Level 2 Roll-up, we simply replace the Strength Scores with the Roll-up Strength Scores of the Arguments. Roll-up Strength Score can be defined as:

RuSS = RuRS * RuTS

That is, the Roll-up Relevance Score times the Roll-up Truth Score of its base Claim. This means that we basically just replace the voted Score of the Arguments with their Roll-up Scores. If the two are the same (the voting and the roll-ups), the Level 2 Score for Claim A will be the same as its Level 1. If the scores are different, then the result will vary accordingly.

For our Claim A, consider the following:

Claim A: Popular Score 60%
Argument A (for): Popular Score 70%
Argument AA (for): Popular Score 80%, Strength Score: 70%
Argument AB (against): Popular Score 60%, Strength Score 50%
Base Claim AC: Popular Score 90%
Argument B (against): Popular Score 50%
Argument BA (for): Popular Score 55%, Strength Score 40%
Base Claim BC: Popular Score 60%

The Level 2 Roll-up Score for Claim A would then be:

TS2 = 0.5 + 0.5 * (AS1A - AS1B)
AS1A = (0.5 + 0.5 * (ASAA - ASAB)) * TSAC
AS1B = (0.5 + 0.5 * (ASBA - ASBB)) * TSBC

For the calculation, we have recursed down one level on both aspects of an Argument: its pro and con Arguments, and its base Claim. But since we have only gone one level deeper, we do not consider the Roll-up Truth Score of the base Claims of its Arguments. For this, we would need to go one level deeper, and calculate the Level 3 Roll-up (and so on).

===3.5.1 Arguments and Claims without Arguments.===

What should we do for the Roll-up Score if we encounter an Argument or a Claim that doesn't have any Arguments of its own? In this case, it will not be possible to calculate any deeper than this. Instead, the calculation will have to substitute this for its Popular Score; that is, its Strength Score or Truth Score, without any other weighting.

In the case of a Claim with no Popular Score (no votes), the default Score of 50% is used. For an Argument with no Popular Score, the default Score of 0% is used.

===3.6 Belief Score.===

Scoring up to this point has been based on using the average of the Popular Score for each element. This is fine when what one wants is a census on popular opinion. However, this is not enough to support two of the main objectives of this platform:

'''''Provide tools for people to understand themselves'''''
'''''Provide ways for people to see the world from another’s perspective'''''

An individual's vote on the score of a Claim or an Argument is, in essence, a statement of their Belief on that subject. For example, it may fine to see that 56% of participants believe that a particular person was telling the truth when they made a statement, but if you believe they were lying, you would want to see that reflected in the Truth Score as a 0%, not as 56%.

As we saw with the Roll-up Score calculations above, the score on one item can have a significant impact on the results of another debate that relies on the Claim. When it comes to seeing popular opinion, one should use the Popular Score, but when it comes to making up one's own mind, it would be useful to ignore the opinions of everyone else, and instead use their own scores.

We call this view the Belief Score. It uses the same mathematics as the Popular Vote and Roll-up Score mechanisms, with only one slight change: for any node on which the user has voted, the user's vote shall be used as the Score, rather than the Popular Score. Node for which the user has not voted shall use the Popular Score, until such time as the user has cast a vote.

Given the simple case of two Arguments A1 and A2 in favor of a Claim, and one Argument B1 against:
A1 (Popular Score: 70%, Belief Score: 40%)
A2 (Popular Score: 50%, no Belief Score given)
B1 (Popular Score: 40%, Belief Score 80%)

We can calculate the Popular Truth Score PTS using the Aggregate Strength Score method as:

PTS = 0.5 + 0.5 * (0.73 - 0.4) = 0.865, or 86.5%

However, the Truth Score based on Belief BTS would be:

BTS = 0.5 + 0.5 * (0.40 - 0.8) = 0.30, or 30%

In this case, the Debater's own personal opinion on the subject differs significantly from common opinion, and further Roll-up Scores based on this Claim would reflect this.

It would also be interesting for users to be able "browse" the opinions of other Debaters (while protecting their privacy, of course) in order to gain a deeper understanding of how others think, and what informs their beliefs. Thus, the system should support the possibility of selecting sample votes of other users and "exploring" their votes on related topics. 

In the example above, the user might decide that they would like to see the votes of a user that gave a Score of more than 90% on the Claim. This might then reveal a result as follows:

A1 (Popular Score: 70%, other user's Belief Score: 80%)
A2 (Popular Score: 50%, other user's Belief Score: 90%)
B1 (Popular Score: 40%, other user's Belief Score 0%)
 
Investigating deeper might reveal that this specific user tends to agree very strongly and unquestionably with some public figure, perhaps the subject of the debate, or that they tend to find a certain subject (reflected in Argument B1) as unimportant.

By allowing users to highlight specific Beliefs in this manner, the platform is able to provide the introspection and deep understanding that is our goal.

===4 Reason Score.===

Reason Score is a vote-free scoring algorithm that places an emphasis on the interaction of Claims and counter-Claims, rather than popular opinion. Reason Score is meant to provide an objective account of the debate, rather than a personal or subjective one. With the voting-based scoring methods, you can defend your side of the debate by scoring the Claims according to your Belief. With Reason Score, the only way to impact the final result is by providing a new, reasonable Claim. Instead of casting a vote you provide a claim to explain why you would have voted differently than the current score.  Reason Score therefore encourages Debaters to think through their objections to a given topic and put it in words, which can result in more complete sets of Claims. 

As a side benefit, Reason Score values do not have to be set to zero after Curation actions (see below), unlike with voting scores. On the other hand, Curation can have a significant impact on the results. Assuming Curation is handled correctly, this is not necessarily a negative trait.

Calculation

The Reason Score for any Claim is a number between 1 and -1 (often displayed as a percentage between 100% and -100%) It is a measure of confidence in the validity of the Claim based on the descendant claims.

A Reason Score can be interpreted as:

{| class="wikitable"
!Score!!Percentage!!Description
|-
| 1||100%|| Absolutely True
|-
| .5||50%|| Likely true
|- 
| 0||0%|| Undecided
|-
| -.5|| -50%|| Not Likely True
|-
| -1|| -100%|| Absolutely Not True
|-
|}

To Calculate the Reason Score (RS):

For each child claim calculate its Weight which is the same as its Reason Score except we want to eliminate false claims so we zero out any negative Reason Score by taking the max between the Reason Score or zero:
<pre>Weight = Max(0,RS)</pre>

For each child claim calculate its Strength which is slightly different between a pro and a con.
<pre>Pro Strength = Weight * RS
Con Strength = Weight * (-RS)</pre>
To calculate the final Reason Score divide the sum of the pro and con weights by the sum of the strengths. 
<pre>RS = sum(Weights)/sum(Strengths)</pre>

[https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/17GFYS2uxZ1vcnP8lWq4VJ80gNVIveTRDeQhJXsP5IeI Formulas in a sample spreadsheet]

Here is some sample code of the simplest interpretation. This does not include relevance:
<pre>
function calculateReasonScore(childClaims) {
	let strengthTotal = 0;
	let weightTotal = 0;
	for (let child of childClaims) {
		const weight = Math.max(0,child.score);
		weightTotal += weight;
		if (child.pro){
			strengthTotal += weight * child.score
		} else {
			strengthTotal += weight * -child.score
		}
	}
	return strengthTotal/weightTotal;
}
</pre>
[https://jsfiddle.net/BentleyDavis/kuxg2e5c/ Jsfiddle simple example code]

[https://jsfiddle.net/BentleyDavis/6hsL1x8y/ JSFiddle example code with relevance]

Note that this is a recursive equation, so care must be taken either to prevent cyclical Arguments, or to replace a repeated value with a default Score (e.g. 1).

Averaging the weights is the default calculation. There are rare circumstances where different calculations will be preferred such as
The lowest claim is used. This is for when the claim is an absolute and any counter proof would dismiss the whole claim.
The highest claim is used. This is used when any positive proof will prove the claim true.

===5 Ranking of Arguments.===

One of the most important roles for scoring is to enable the ranking of Arguments, from "best" (strongest or most relevant) to worst. This is, most of all, in support of the Objective:

'''''It should be possible to grasp the principle arguments of a debate in 30 seconds or less'''''

By assigning a Score based on popular or personal opinion, or on the preponderance of facts, it becomes possible to design an interface which highlights the most salient information in a given debate. 

One type of user interface currently under consideration is the possibility of voting by ranking. The ability to manually sort Arguments in order of "best" to "worst", and use this as a mechanism for voting is a compelling possibility. It remains to be decided what such a ranking would mean, however. Would the average user be sophisticated enough to sort ONLY by Relevance, or would the ranking have to be considered its overall Strength, according to how convincing the user considers each Argument to be (and how, then, would one register a Relevance Score for an Argument with a base Claim that is totally false)?
